Thank you.
¶¶
Thanks for joining us.
I'm Diane Rain.
My guest this hour, Nicholas Bazbaines, is author of a trilogy of books about books.
He's gathered anecdotes about the history of books and libraries and met book collectors all over the world.
The third volume, called
A Splendor of Letters covers the role books play in preserving a culture and the role we play in preserving books.
Throughout the hour, we'll welcome your calls, questions, comments.
Join us on 1-800-433-8850 or send us your emails to drshow.com.
at wamu.org.
It's good to see you again.
Thank you, Diane.
Thank you for inviting me.
The subtitle of your book, The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World, implies that books may be very fragile in our world right now.
I think books have always been fragile in our world and
Two of the chapters that I develop in this book deal with what we call biblioclasm.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines this as the calculated, deliberate
destruction of books.
I mean, I certainly am concerned with the loss of books through nature or through accident, but this is where cultures really target books and target libraries as a way of destroying a hated enemy.
And you think that this would be something that would be rooted in the distant past, but I just point to 1992 on August 25th when in Sarajevo, where Serbian gunners
targeted the National Library there, and in one night, a single night, 1.5 million books and manuscripts went up in flames.
I mean, Hitler, in his best night, never did 1.5 million books.
But, of course, that is the most vivid recollection so many of us have of the Nazi book.
Exactly, the book, and didn't that galvanize the world?
When you think that in 1933 Goebbels stood and they were talking about these enemies of the state, and who were some of these enemies?
Helen Keller, I mean Albert Einstein.
Helen Keller, who had written books and the royalties of which she had committed to the orphans of German children, had committed these funds to helping German people, and yet her books, because she was deemed perhaps to be a socialist or whatever, her books were destroyed in the auto de fe in Germany.
What do you believe is the underlying motivation for destruction of books around the world?
Is it fear?
Is it knowledge?
Is it the capacity to learn?
Well, those are excellent questions, and I think you hit the nail on the head.
I use a quote from Orwell, 1984.
And when people read Orwell and they recall that novel, they think Big Brother is watching you is the most important quote.
But the sentence that I have chosen, that I have selected to be so resonant here, is the one that goes like this.
Who controls the present controls the past.
Who controls the past controls the future.
And when you think about the destruction in Sarajevo in 1992, this was all part of an unspeakable horror known as ethnic cleansing.
It's not enough to kill the people.
If you're really going to eliminate them, you have to destroy their cultural artifacts, their talisman, their libraries, ultimately their books.
And that is why tyrants through history have been so emboldened to do this.
But in a sense, the United States is not free of that destruction of books, however, without malice, simply by allowing books to degrade, disappear, move off.
Exactly, and these are other issues.
The biblioclasm element is one aspect, and as I said, it's two chapters in a book of ten chapters.
I'm also concerned with decisions that libraries make not only to allow books to disintegrate, but to willfully select books for deaccession and for discarding.
How did they do that?
How does the library of Congress do that, for example?
Well, you have to, you know, I think that it's impossible to keep everything.
So some decisions have to be made.
I mean, we have to weed, I suppose.
Those of us, I'm sure you're in this.
It's very difficult to live in a house with 10,000 books.
Exactly.
And, you know, they multiply at night sometimes.
You wake up and they seem to be more than they were when you went to bed.
But decisions have to be made, I suppose, on what books that you will discard.
My fear is that every library is going to be getting rid of the same book.
Every public library, every major library, does make decisions about books that are no longer applicable to their collections.
There are libraries that have databases that show that books haven't been read in five years, and maybe that's justification.
They've gone by their read-by date.
Their read-by date has expired.
I'm being facetious, of course.
But books are then selected to be discarded.
You know, one of my very favorite personal collections in my home, I collect any number of different kinds of books, but I call it my orphan collection.
These are books that all have one thing in common.
They are all ex libris.
They all bear a stamp that says withdrawn or discarded.
And I go around with my wife to flea markets and to yard sales and to library sales.
And we find these books.
I mean, my first edition copy of Dibdin's Bibliomania, well, actually, it's the second print in 1840, bears the former ownership stamp of the Concord Public Library in Concord, Massachusetts.
I mean, it was there...
in that library when Emerson was living in Concord, Massachusetts.
You have to tell me how many books you have in your own library.
Well, we estimate between 10 and 15,000.
You say, boy, that's a big gap.
How can you not know whether it's 10 or 15?
In my second book, Patience and Fortitude,
which I should point out is not a Jane Austen novel.
Those are the names of the lions that stand guard in front of the New York Public Library, which I thought was a good image, lions standing guard at the gates of knowledge and of information for that book.
But as I point out in that book,
I'm afraid I lost the thread of the question there, Diana.
Well, it was simply how many books you had in your own library.
How many books do I have?
How in the world you can keep, you must have some in storage.
Exactly, and that's exactly where I was going.
In Patience and Fortitude, I have a chapter called Deep Sleep.
and that chapter is about off-site storage.
Well, I have some off-site storage.
I have a garage I rent in a little town I live in in central Massachusetts, and that garage is also filled with books, but about 15,000, I would say.
And I'm talking with Nicholas Baz Baines.
He is the author of a new book,
part of a trilogy.
It's called A Splendor of Letters, The Permanence of Books in an Impermanent World.
I do invite you to join us.
I'm sure you have your own thoughts about books, the permanence or impermanence thereof.
And if you would like to join us, 1-800-433-8850 or
send us your emails to drshow at wamu.org.
In the preface of A Splendor of Letters, you tell the story of a message in a bottle.
Talk about how that story illustrates what you're trying to get across in this book.
It was happenstance.
I was on vacation with my family on Cape Cod a couple years ago and read in the local newspaper, the Cape Cod Times,
how a bottle bearing a message dropped over the side of a ship by an oceanographer from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in 1968 or 1969 had been found 30-some-odd years later.
It had washed up on the beach in Nassau, and it had been found by another oceanographer.
Now, when you think of here's a message,
from one professional basically to another, and how it had made the passage across the vast ocean.
Of course, what is a better image than a vast, bottomless ocean, and the fragile carrier of information being this little bottle?
And the message was still readable?
It was totally readable.
It had been written on corrugated paper.
It had been sealed in a green glass bottle.
And the man who tossed it over the side of the ship, which makes it very interesting, it wasn't just, hello, how are you, my name is so-and-so.
It was, here is where I am precisely at sea.
These are my coordinates.
This is the date that I'm putting this over the side.
And he forgot about it.
But then it was discovered by an oceanographer who was able to compute the currents that it might have followed.
So it did send across an interesting message, however unlikely that might be.
Do you know if the two people...
finally spoke to each other.
Oh, they did.
They became friends.
They corresponded.
And what happened, he put his telephone number in there and he came home one night and there was a message on his answering machine and that the fellow's name was Sir Nicholas Nuttall.
He lived in
Bermuda, and he had a title as a peer, and he was also an oceanographer, and he said, I found the bottle, and the other guy who sent it had no clue as to what he'd forgotten about it.
It had been so long.
Does that make you want to put a bottle in the ocean?
Well, not really.
I guess what it does is it just energizes me into it.
encourages me that all is not lost.
The written word is important.
The written word is not only important, but that it has a way of surviving.
You know, I can only find one quintessential example of where the deliberate destruction of a culture, a final solution, has really worked, and that's the destruction of Carthage in 146 BC by the Romans, where the Roman Senate decreed Carthage must be destroyed,
And not only did they go and kill the people and reduce the city to rubble, but they destroyed
all of their books.
And then the Carthaginians were a very literate people.
They were brilliant people.
And one of the chapters I have in this book I call Ex Libris Punicis, which means the Punic books, the Carthaginian books, which a Roman historian, Sallust, mentioned in a book in the first century B.C.
and how a few of these had survived and had been translated for him and how important they were.
And, of course, they are all gone.
Survived in the sense that they were not on the kind of
paper that we know now.
No, no, no.
What had happened is that when the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus was reducing Carthage to rubble, he took a few items from the library.
It is assumed, and it has been suggested in a few sources, and that these books were given to some African princes who had supported the Roman cause.
And so these few books had been later, a few, about 50 years later, been translated for the writer Sallust.
That's a long story, but those two... But it's a wonderful story.
It's a wonderful story.
But I do want to get to this question of paper...
versus linen or versus other materials on which the written word has been preserved and may not be preserved now because of the disintegration.
Have you ever handled a 500-year-old book called an incunable up at the Library of Congress, say, or...
The Folger Shakespeare Library, a first folio that has been published in 1623.
These books are in remarkably fine condition because the original paper that they were printed on is pure paper.
It has a number of different fibers in there.
Paper is a remarkable, durable medium.
When we talk about an incunable, which means it's a Latin phrase from the cradle, from the cradle of printing, which is 15th century.
These books have survived for half a millennium, and they're beautiful.
Go take a look at the Gutenberg Bible at the Library of Congress and see.
They say it is still the example of where the first was the best.
Think of any other technological achievement where the first is still the model by which all others are judged.
And if you go take a look at the Gutenberg Bible, it's brilliant.
It's beautiful.
It's perfect.
The paper has survived.
It is only when we get into the 19th century when they start putting acids into the pulp, and then you start to have this acidic paper that yellows and crumbles.
And disintegrates.
And that has been addressed, and I write about that in this book, the efforts that have been made to deacidify and to preserve many of these books.
And the book is called A Splendor of Letters.
Nicholas Bazbaines is the author.
When we come back, we'll talk about books, libraries, what's happening to them.
Take your calls, comments, questions.
Stay with us.
Nicholas Baspain said the title of this third book in your trilogy, A Splendor of Letters, has an interesting origin.
It does.
My wife and I, as I mentioned, we like to go out to book fairs.
We like to go to yard sales, tag sales.
We go to discard sales that libraries mount, where they...
the books that you and I were talking about a little earlier that have been deselected and books that normally sell for 25 cents or 50 cents and these are my orphans.
I liken it to going to the dog pound and giving some animal with an uncertain future a new lease on life.
These are books that are one step away from the landfill or the pulping plant.
Well, my wife and I one spring afternoon went to a sale of the Worcester Art Museum in Worcester, Massachusetts and while I was fooling around with some
catalogs, sale catalogs.
I collect sale catalogs, Christie, Sotheby's, etc.
On a folding table, my wife was rummaging through this cardboard box on the floor.
And in this box was a bundle of magazines bound in twine.
The Dial magazine, which was published and began publishing in 1839.
It was founded by Ralph Waldo Emerson.
The founding editor was Margaret Fuller.
One of the principal contributors was Thoreau.
These are books that are exceedingly scarce and very, very important in the American literary canon, and they were about, you know, two hours away from the pulping plant, and Connie, my wife, rescued these, and there's no other way to describe it.
She rescued them.
And in one of these magazines was an article by Emerson where he uses the phrase, and I have a lengthy, we won't read it because it's lengthy, but a lengthy excerpt from an Emerson article called Thoughts on Literature where he describes books as these splendors of letters.
And Connie, I have to give her credit, she titled this book and she titled Patience and Fortitude and she pointed, she said, there's your title right there.
Because not only was it a discard,
Not only was it an important essay, but it struck with such pertinence to the whole point of what we were writing about in this book.
And Emerson and I share the same birthday, May 25th.
Truly, truly.
He is 200 years old this year.
He's looking at me in his rearview mirror.
I'm catching up, I'm afraid.
Well, you know, that brings to mind a thought, Nicholas Bazbaines, and that is, number one, do you have children?
Two daughters.
Are they as interested in books, magazines, publications as you?
They grew up with books, and isn't it interesting, my older daughter went to Smith College, and our younger daughter will be graduating from Sweet Briar down here in Virginia, and they both worked in the library.
This has been their choice.
I ask that question because I wonder what happens.
when you are no longer here to protect, conserve, defend.
They've already told us precisely the things that they want, and I invite them to take anything that they want.
These books are our books, and they derive as much joy out of the library as my wife and I do.
They bring friends to the house because it is a library and say, what have we got on mathematics?
What have we got on aviation?
And I know I pride myself in knowing where everything is because it all is double-shelved.
I mean, there are books behind books.
I see.
In most houses, young kids come to the house and say, where is such and such a video?
Where is this DVD in your house?
They come for books.
Here is an email from Evie in Flagstaff, Arizona.
I love the Victorian mystery author, Wilkie Collins.
Once in the late 1990s, I checked out one of his books from the public library.
I noticed that the book had not been checked out since 1965.
I called...
and asked the librarian if I could buy the book from them, since it was clearly not an active volume on their shelves.
She said, no, I could not buy it outright, but I could lose it and pay the lost book fee, which I think was $35.
This I did gladly and added the book to my collection of Cullen's work.
I'm conflicted on that, I have to say.
On the one hand, I guess I'm happy the book didn't go to a pulping plant, but on the other hand, as that letter started, I was so happy that the library said that they were going to keep it, even though nobody had checked it out.
But then to encourage someone to
steal the book, I guess, but pay for it so your conscience can be clear.
I can't say that I approve of that.
I begin Patience and Fortitude, by the way, by telling a little story.
I'll make it very brief.
I was desperate to find a book.
I couldn't find it anywhere.
It was an early edition of the catalog to Samuel Pepys' library.
Harvard didn't have it.
The Boston Public Library didn't have it.
I finally found it in the Boston Athenaeum.
It was an 85-year-old book.
It had never been checked out.
Oh.
But there they had it, and as I was checking it out, I'm ebullient, and I say, oh, boy, 84 years, never been used.
Who do you suppose they bought this book for?
And the man looked up, and he said, we bought it for you, Mr. Bazbanks.
Oh, how marvelous.
It's been here 84 years waiting for you, and that's what a library's mission is.
If nobody had used the book in 30 years, okay, fine.
But our job, our mission, our responsibility is to keep it and to make it available for the readers who come, readers yet unborn, in my view.
Let's talk for just a moment about libraries and what is happening to them.
I mean, we've had a situation here in Montgomery County, a suburb of Washington, where the library was completely redone.
and then did not have the money to reopen because the state funding, county funding, had been cut back.
Now, you've got these kinds of situations occurring around the country.
Libraries are closing because states don't have sufficient funds to maintain them.
And unfortunately, libraries don't really have lobbyists for them.
They don't have activists.
They don't have people that will go forward and say, the most bang for your budget
tax buck that you can get is in the public library, and it's the least, I mean, I don't know what percentage of our tax dollars goes to libraries, but I will bet in any major city that more people have library cards and participate and use the public library than any other municipal activity that I can think of.
And yet, why is it that when the funds get tight, they really penalize the library?
And I know that there's an organization here in the District of Columbia, Save DC Libraries, which is working to restore money and to put money back into the budget and has been quite successful, in fact, at doing that.
But to me, it's a great transgression to really victimize the libraries.
All right, let's open the phones.
1-800-433-8850.
If you'll just put those headphones on, you'll be able to participate with our callers.
The first is from Ridgewood, New Jersey.
Good morning, Deborah.
Thanks for joining us.
Good morning.
I am touched by this conversation that I was...
One of very secretive, obsessive compulsives about books.
My comment, though, is when books get you into trouble.
Some years ago, I was a member of a group of book readers, a book group, nice ladies, and we read nice books.
And, of course, the discussion came up about the war, and I had read a book by the Cockburn Brothers,
that had educated me about the first Gulf War, and that caused me to go into a whole trilogy of other books about the wars, I found that I began making statements that no one in the group was familiar with, and they considered me a supporter of, well, not very patriotic, and I got kicked out of my book group.
And then that caused me to start reading books about pacifism and war resistance, and
I came up with a book that was discarded from a library in California called Poems of War Resistance from 2000 BC to, I guess, the Vietnam War.
And I found that I wasn't alone.
So from 2000 BC to the present, there have been people writing about this phenomenon and how isolated you tend to feel when
You know a little bit more about war and how futile it tends to be.
You know, Deborah, what I love about this story is that...
this book was a discard.
You wouldn't have discovered this, everything that you just spoke about, had you not come across one of these orphan books that I was just talking about.
It was a discard.
It was a book that people at a library in California apparently had deemed irrelevant and that nobody would be interested in, and yet here's this woman in New Jersey, and it's moved her and changed her life.
Indeed.
Thanks for calling, Debra.
Here's an email from Kellyanne, Oklahoma City,
I am concerned that with the rise of audiobooks and e-books, there will be less availability eventually to everyone.
No special equipment is required to read a printed page, but for those who do not have the appropriate electronic device, audiobooks or e-books are unavailable.
Many of us have found our music collections to be inaccessible with the arrival of newer forms of audio equipment.
Two points there, and that is, are those audiobooks beginning to overtake?
Not at all.
In a word, what's that expression, don't give up the day job just yet?
Yeah.
I mean, how many different titles were produced in the United States last year?
60,000, give or take.
I throw this out as a challenge.
How many people out there have read a book from page one to the final page completely on a computer screen?
I've yet to meet a person who's done it.
The fact of the matter is reading a book is a tactile experience.
We handle the book.
And when people want something online, what do they do?
when they want to read it at any depth and any length, they download it and they print it.
They print it out.
They still want that artifact.
My view is that the printed book has a long way to go before we write its obituary.
And here's Mike in Beltsville looking back.
Was there a time when people saw that the codex type of book would overtake the scroll in availability?
Did this transition cause a crisis among those who could read?
That's a great question, and I write about it in this book, in fact, at some length.
There have always been people who are resistant to change.
There was an abbot by the name of Trithemius.
I write about Trithemius.
He was writing in 1493.
He was a very famous man of his time, and he wrote this book in praise of scribes.
I quote it at length in here, and what he said, scribes of the world, don't give up your quills, the printing press can't last, you know, he goes on in that vein.
And what I find really kind of cutely ironic about that is he made this between the hardcovers of a printed book, and nothing in his handwriting pertaining to this particular essay survives.
You know, there's always been a technological opposition.
When the photograph was invented and introduced in 1839, everyone thought, I mean painters, not everyone, but artists, painters thought, this is the end, we're done.
How can we possibly compete with this medium?
But as Dr. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, said to me, and I quote him in this book, he said, what the photograph did to painting is allow them to explore new areas of artistic expression.
To expand rather than contract.
And what I think that the electronic...
medium will allow the printed book to do will be to really achieve its full potential as a creative medium.
We're not going to need telephone books anymore, but we are going to use these objects, these artifacts for creativity.
At 25 before the hour, you're listening to the Diane Rehm Show.
And on that very question, let's go to Phoenix, Arizona.
Leanne, good morning to you.
Hi, Diane.
How are you doing?
Fine, thanks.
Good.
I find that this is a very interesting conversation.
My mother is an English major, and my sister inherited her love of books.
I, however, not really.
I'm trying to get back into it.
I'm a television producer, so I love the media.
I love movies and television and stuff, and I personally am not crazy about books.
I'm getting there.
So I guess my question would be, you know, with the emergence of the technology, I heard you say that no one is about to, you know, read an entire book online, but don't you think that that could save some of these old books and some of these old stories?
I mean, you know, some of the older books and stuff, when they're made into movies, that just rekindles, you know, the excitement about these old ideas and these old stories.
And I would think that this
this technology and stuff could actually inspire a whole generation of new people to get back into reading.
Well, it might bring people to reading, but I don't see how the medium is going to work to preserve when you think you're a producer.
What's the lifespan of a CD?
I mean, 10 years?
What good is a perfectly preserved document, say, on Microsoft Word 500 years from now if there's no software to read it on?
What good is Stonehenge as a computer if nobody can interpret what these symbols mean?
That's the big problem, ensuring the longevity of these digital documents.
People have written about this.
Jeff Nunberg is one of the principal engineers who's working on this.
Fine, we can create digital documents, but how do we preserve them for the long run?
Because the hardware and the software is changing all the time, and it is so vulnerable to decay.
I'm not so sure that it is vulnerable.
that it is the way to ensure long-term preservation.
I think there is a question on that very issue.
Jim in Cantonville, Ohio.
Good morning.
Well, good morning to you both.
Mr. Besbaines, I've just been summing patience and fortitude again as I've been waiting to get on the line.
I wanted to thank you for giving me a term for my lifestyle in that book.
I always wondered what I was, and I found out that I was an ideo-rhythmic monk.
Say that again.
That's great.
Good for you.
Ideo-rhythmic monasticism.
I don't know if you want to... You can speak to that if you want, or we can let it pass.
I think we'll just suggest people go to Chapter 2 of that book and to follow my trip to Mount Athos in Greece, where there was this monastic tradition that really preserved a culture
by preserving the documents and preserving the books.
But there are two kinds of monasticism, and the idio-rhythmic kind are the people who follow their own... What's the translation there, Jim?
Following your own life's harmonies or something like that?
Yeah.
Anyway, yeah, regarding a book collection, and then I want to talk about my own publishing experience briefly.
My rule was once I got to 1,000 books, it was one in, one out.
So whenever I found a book I didn't think I could live without
I had to cull one from my collection.
Umberto Eco makes it $30,000.
Everything over $30,000 is, if one comes in, one has to go.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Okay, but anyway, that was my rubric.
With my own experience, I had some background in writing for newspapers and magazines and journals and so forth.
Well, I did a memoir.
And I decided, I did contact some people and had some interest, but the time lag and the time frame for getting a book out, I wrote it primarily for my son and for some colleagues.
And so I decided, because of having complete control over all the elements of the book, that I went with on-demand electronic publishing.
And I wanted to address that as perhaps a middle way.
where obviously, you know, the tax laws, this may be a little bit of inside baseball, but when the tax laws change so that booksellers could no longer keep their backlist inventories without them being taxed, that's when we started to lose things.
All right, Jim, we'll talk about that after we take just a short break.
If you want to stay on the line, I think Nicholas can respond.
Stay with us.
National broadcast of The Diane Rehm Show is made possible in part by American University's School of Public Affairs, offering a variety of graduate programs in political science, public administration, and justice, law, and society.
Information at american.edu slash spa.
Additional support for NPR comes from NPR stations, from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting,
and from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
This is NPR National Public Radio.
The photographs of Joseph Scheer capture a beauty invisible to the naked eye, the kaleidoscopic colors and intricate patterns of the common moth.
On the next Fresh Air, a talk with Scheer and moth expert Mark Epstein.
Also, science writer Carl Zimmer tells us about the founder of modern neurology.
Join us for the next Fresh Air.